First of all, we of course have to understand how authentication works
and with that, I don't mean that users have to enter their e-mail and password and login
but how it technically works behind the scenes. For that, it helps if we think about how our web application
or how any web application works.
We have a client, which would be our browser, the user using the browser and we have a server.
Now when the user enters his credentials, so the e-mail and password, then this authentication data is
sent to a server where that data is validated.
We can't do that validation in the browser because all the Javascript code in the browser is exposed
to our users and therefore not stored securely
and the logic there could be changed as well,
users can edit or even disable the Javascript in the browser. So we can use that to create a nice user
experience
and to kind of show different parts of our application based on the authentication status but we can't
control or validate the authentication status in the browser,
that has to happen on the server,
so in a place where the users of our application can't do anything.
Now if you think about a traditional web application, where the server would render pages for different
URLs you enter,
so where the server would render different HTML pages for the different URLs, you would
work with a session but remember that with Angular, we built single page applications.
That means we also decouple the front-end, the Angular application from the back-end. For the different
pages we visit, that all gets handled by Angular and its router. Javascript in the browser takes
over and re-renders pages or parts of pages as our user interface and the current state of the user
requires it.
We still reach out to the back-end as you learned in the HTTP modules,
we can still interact with a server but that server will be a RESTful API and therefore we'll not use
a session because RESTful APIs are stateless,
the same would be true for GraphQL API
by the way.
The core thing is that our back-end, our server will be an API.
It will not be a server that renders the HTML pages we're on and therefore sessions can't be used
because our server doesn't care about the client. Client and server are decoupled from each other,
they communicate through the HttpClient Angular offers but besides that, there is no connection,
the server doesn't know our client so to say. And therefore, a session is no solution,
a session would be stored on the server and as I just said, the server doesn't care about our client.
Instead we'll use a different approach, where the server will validate the user e-mail and password and
if all that data is valid, the server will send the client a token, a JSON Web Token typically. That
is an encoded string which contains a lot of metadata and that string is encoded not encrypted, that's
important,
which means this string could be unpacked and read by the client.
More importantly though, that string, that token is generated on the server with a certain algorithm
and a certain secret which only the server knows and only the server can validate incoming tokens for
their validity because the idea is that the client, which is our browser, our Angular App, stores that
token in some storage, like a local storage of the browser and attaches the token to any request that
thereafter is sent to the server which needs to be authenticated.
So let's say we need to be authenticated to store recipes, we then need to attach that token in the header
or as a query parameter to that request we're sending to the server,
so to that store recipes request.
Now the server is able to validate that token because the server did create that token with a certain
algorithm and a certain private key, which is only known to the server,
that is how the token is secured. We can't generate or edit the token on the client because as soon as
we do that, it will not fit the algorithm and private key used on the server and the server is therefore
able to determine that that token is invalid and the server can therefore block access.
This is why this is secure, because the server knows more than the client but we give the client one
important piece which is required to authenticate subsequent requests but that piece is given by the
server, it can't be generated on the client for the security reasons I just stated.
Now that's the theory,
it will become clearer if we simply start implementing it
and that of course starts with offering a user interface where users can enter their credentials, where
they can sign up and where they can login and thereafter, we'll step-by-step add the logic to create
such a token, store such a token, attach such a token to requests and so on.